Karen, you've always been known for your warm, infectious smile.
Could you tell us what has helped you to cope with a serious health challenge and yet still
maintain such a positive attitude?
Surprisingly, I have never cried because of having LS.
I only break down out of frustration when I can't communicate.
When I was first diagnosed, I figured it was time to copy my study Bible and other
notes I had been saving and put them in electronic format.
I wrote so small, no one could read them.
It took a year, but reading the Bible and notes spilled me up.
All the prayers said for us certainly help, the boxes of cards with encouraging words
and scripture.
We have never been without flowers which cheer us up and being surrounded by love.
I think we all feel that way.
There's no other organization that would take care of us, same like Jova's organization
and his people.
But Karen, can you tell us a little bit about this device that you're using to communicate?
How exactly does it work?
This computer is a life saver because it enables me to talk.
You know how much I like to talk.
It is called an eye gaze because I calibrate this to my eyes and then stare at a keyboard
on the screen and I can type words.
It also suggests words like on your phone, so I don't have to type everything out.
I can save responses that I want to use again.
You might wonder how it can sound like me.
I didn't save my voice in time, so my sister recorded 50 sentences that have all the
sounds needed for English.
Since we are twins, we sound the same.
Wow, that's amazing.
What a blessing to be able to have even your sister help you out with it as well.
So Reiner, how are you able to obtain this device?
When you have ALS or Lugerix as it is called also, then the state of New York pays for
all the equipment.
This device with the insurance and all the attachments goes for up to about $18,000.
So it's amazing what this government does for us.
What a blessing from Jehovah.
So Karen, how has this helped you to maintain a regular study of the Bible and even helped
you with your participation at the meetings?
I can type comments for meetings ahead of time.
And I can study on JW Library and access JW dot org.
It is much slower, but at least I can study and participate.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Reiner, can you tell us how do the friends in the curingation react when they hear Karen
comment at the meetings?
The congregation is very appreciative and they're really encouraged by that because just
about every meeting, Karen has a comment.
And after she gives a comment, they say, all we're glad it was Karen and not you, Reiner.
So they're very happy to hear Karen and see her.
Very good.
These last couple questions are for both of you.
Maybe we could start with you, Reiner.
How have you received strength and support, particularly from your brothers and sisters
during this trial?
Do you have any specific examples that you can share with us?
Yes, the brothers here in the infirmary are just outstanding.
And I think this would be the first time I would get through an interview without getting
emotional.
Sorry about that.
They are so nice and so helpful.
They come in the morning at 8.30, they ask if Karen is up already, can she get up?
When they get up and they get ready for a breakfast and sometimes that goes till 11,
11, 30 before she can have breakfast.
So this is a lot of work and they do it such a beautiful job.
Remarkable.
Absolutely.
I'm sure they appreciate your expressions as well.
What about you, Karen?
How have you appreciated the support from the brothers and sisters?
Besides what I mentioned, our congregation heard about me.
They wanted to learn how to make my cookies.
So they took my recipes and created a gorgeous cookbook and gave us copies to share.
Then they arranged baking classes via Zoom.
It means so much to me that a part of me will continue.
It was a real witness to our unbelieving relatives too.
Wow.
So here's the cookbook.
It's not where they come from.
This way.
That's beautiful.
Look at that.
Cookies don't even know about it.
The sister composed it and it was beautiful display and the example said, it's outstanding.
Wow.
That's beautiful to see how everyone's rallied around both of you to support.
So the last question, how have you seen Jehovah's hand in your lives as you face this challenge?
Maybe you could start with you, Rhine, please?
Yes, of course this is a very difficult situation because when you're paralyzed, it's
bad.
But if you're paralyzed and you're not able to speak, that makes a very difficult situation.
But the help of the brothers has been outstanding.
The love is remarkable.
Absolutely.
Thank you for sharing.
What about you, Karen?
We appreciate now why the infirmary is always mentioned in the letters to the Bethel family.
The ones who take care of us cannot be compared to others in the same profession.
They work with heart.
It isn't just a job to them, but they work with love.
My aunt was on Zoom when a PCA kissed me on the forehead as she left.
My aunt said, with tears in her eyes, they love her.